In-class exercises:
- I think these were useful but they all felt a bit rushed. Not sure what to do about this; having students do more of the content as pre-class homework might help.
- many students didn't bother to pick up their papers afterwards (which was unwise since some of the exam questions were based on them)
- collecting all the papers to mark for completion is a hassle. Not sure how else to do it -- if marks are not awarded then students will very likely not spend time on it.
- having TAs come to class for these is helpful, but they often need to be prodded to walk around

Written assignments: 
- "best 2 out of 3" scheme did not lead to much more grading than just having 2 "must-do" assignments --
 only about 10 people did all 3. Unsurprisingly there were last-minut extension requests on assignment 3 from
students who didn't do both 1 and 2. A handful of students did none of the assignments; these were just about
the only people who failed the course.
- for assignment 2, one of the videos was shorter than the others (20 min compared to an hour) and most students picked that one. 

- there were issues with plagiarism which were caught by the use of turnitin. 
- for grading, I gave the TAs the rubric developed by a colleague in previous years. I didn't give them a target average grade (which I believe they said had been done in previous years) and I did not do enough follow-up to see that the marks were reasonable.

- I should have read more of the essays to see what students were thinking.


PeerWise:
- some initial problems with registration, or trying to create an account and getting kicked back to registration screen. Latter problem often solved by using a different web browser.
- posting "interim" PeerWise marks was problematic for a few students since they thought it meant they had missed a deadline. Some students still managed to miss the end of year deadline, and I didn't given them any mercy on this.
- there were some good question made up, and a lot of not-so-good ones. Many were probably copy-and-pasted from elsewhere although I didn't check for this. Also didn't check for (eg) stupid or abusive comments. Could have the PeerWise TA monitor more closely.


Exams:
- the issue with different rooms having different amounts of time for the midterm was stupid and avoidable. next time, give better instructions to TAs.
- assigned seating worked OK. Remembering to reserve second room for midterm far in advance worked well too.
- I think short-answer questions on midterm and final were a good idea. While there was correlation between scores on SA and MCQ, there was a lot of scatter too; different students did well in different parts. Need to leave enough TA time for marking.
- collecting exams in letter-marked envelopes really helped with the sorting afterwards.
- length of exams was about right; not too many students were struggling to finish at end.

- I thought about doing 2-stage exams but decided it was too much work in a new course. Might do it if I taught the course again.


